---
name: Pharmacokinetics
topic: Analysis of Pharmacokinetic Data
maintainer: Bill Denney
email: wdenney@humanpredictions.com
version: 2022-12-05
source: https://github.com/cran-task-views/Pharmacokinetics/
---

Analysis of pharmacokinetic (PK) data is concerned with defining the
relationship between the dosing regimen and the body's exposure to drug
as indicated by the concentration time curve to determine a dose. To
analyze PK data, there are three categories of packages within CRAN:
noncompartmental analysis (NCA), modeling (typically using compartmental
analysis), and reporting (typically for NCA).

Pharmacokinetics are often collected during clinical trials of new drugs.  For
more information on R packages for clinical trials, see
`r view("ClinicalTrials")`.

# Call for a co-maintainer

CRAN task views hopes that all task views will have multiple maintainers from
diverse backgrounds.  If you are interested in becoming a co-maintainer of this
task view, please contact the current maintainer (listed at the top of the task
view).

# Noncompartmental Analysis (NCA)

NCA is used as method of description of PK with minimal assumptions of the rates
of distribution of the drug through the body. NCA is typically used to describe
the PK of a drug in clinical studies with many samples per subject on the same
and sequential days.

The NCA packages are:

`r pkg("ncappc")`:
Performs traditional NCA and simulation-based posterior predictive
checks for a population PK model using NCA metrics. It targets
summarizing data from model-fit or simulated sources.

`r pkg("NonCompart")`:
Provides basic computational functions for NCA.

`r pkg("PK")`:
Allows estimation of pharmacokinetic parameters using
non-compartmental theory. Both complete sampling and sparse sampling
designs are implemented. The package provides methods for hypothesis
testing and confidence intervals related to superiority and
equivalence.

`r pkg("PKNCA")`:
Computes standard NCA parameters and summarizes them with the goal
of taking in observed clinical data and providing summaries ready
for study reports and regulatory submission.

`r pkg("qpNCA")`:
Noncompartmental Pharmacokinetic Analysis by qPharmetra

# Pharmacometric Modeling

Modeling of PK data typically uses compartmental methods which assume
that the drug enters the body either through an intravenous (IV) or
extravascular (often oral or subcutaneous, SC) dose. Packages listed
below are restricted to packages that have specific interest to PK
modeling and not the (many) packages that support modeling that could be
used for PK data. The PK modeling and simulation packages are:

`r pkg("bayesnec")`:
A Bayesian No-Effect- Concentration (NEC) Algorithm

`r pkg("clinPK")`:
Calculates equations commonly used in clinical pharmacokinetics and
clinical pharmacology, such as equations for dose individualization,
compartmental pharmacokinetics, drug exposure, anthropomorphic
calculations, clinical chemistry, and conversion of common clinical
parameters. Where possible and relevant, it provides multiple
published and peer-reviewed equations within the respective R
function.

`r pkg("cpk")`:
Provides simplified clinical pharmacokinetic functions for dose
regimen design and modification at the point-of-care.

`r pkg("dfpk")`:
Provides statistical methods involving PK measures for dose finding
in Phase 1 clinical trials.

`r pkg("dr4pl")`:
Dose Response Data Analysis using the 4 Parameter Logistic (4pl) Model

`r pkg("linpk")`:
Generate Concentration-Time Profiles from Linear PK Systems

`r pkg("mrgsolve")`:
Facilitates simulation from hierarchical, ordinary differential
equation (ODE) based models typically employed in drug development.

`r pkg("rxode2")`: Methods for simulation from drug development  hierarchical ordinary 
differential equations (ODE). This is the basis of the `r pkg("nlmixr2")` package and 
superseds the `RxODE` package.

`r pkg("nlmixr2")`:
Nonlinear Mixed Effects Models in Population PK/PD (superseding the `nlmixr`
package)

`r pkg("nmw")`:
Is a package to understand the algorithms of NONMEM.

`r pkg("PKconverter")`:
The Parameter Converter of the Pharmacokinetic Models

`r pkg("pkdata")`:
Creates Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) Data

`r pkg("pmxTools")`:
Pharmacometric tools for common data analytical tasks; closed-form
solutions for calculating concentrations at given times after dosing
based on compartmental PK models (1-compartment, 2-compartment and
3-compartment, covering infusions, zero- and first-order absorption,
and lag times, after single doses and at steady state, per Bertrand
& Mentre (2008)); parametric simulation from NONMEM-generated
parameter estimates and other output; and parsing, tabulating and
plotting results generated by Perl-speaks-NONMEM (PsN).

`r pkg("ubiquity")`:
PKPD, PBPK, and Systems Pharmacology Modeling Tools

`r pkg("UnifiedDoseFinding")`:
Dose-Finding Methods for Non-Binary Outcomes

`r pkg("wnl")`:
Minimization Tool for Pharmacokinetic-Pharmacodynamic Data Analysis

# Pharmacokinetics Reporting

Communication of results is as important (or more important) than
actually completing an analysis. While many users are currently using
rmarkdown and knitr for general reporting, the features of packages
which are important for reporting PK data are:

`r pkg("ncar")`:
Provides NCA for a report writer generating rtf and pdf output.

`r pkg("pkr")`:
Generates NCA data sets compliant to CDISC and other pharmacokinetic
functions for reviewer.

`r pkg("xpose")`:
Diagnostics for non-linear mixed-effects (population) models from
'NONMEM'. 'xpose' facilitates data import, creation of numerical
run summary and provide 'ggplot2'-based graphics for data
exploration and model diagnostics.

`r pkg("xpose.nlmixr2")`:
Graphical Diagnostics for Pharmacometric Models: Extension to 'nlmixr2'
(superseding the `xpose.nlmixr` package)

`r pkg("nlmixr2rpt")`: Provides automatic reporting of `nlmixr2` models as
word documents and powerpoint documents.

# Datasets or Single Models

Packages that focus on a single pharmacokinetic model or dataset include:

`r pkg("caffsim")`:
Simulate plasma caffeine concentrations using population
pharmacokinetic model described in Lee, Kim, Perera, McLachlan and
Bae (2015)

# Study Design

Packages related to PK study design include:

`r pkg("dfpk")`:
Statistical methods involving PK measures are provided, in the dose allocation
process during a Phase I clinical trials. These methods, proposed by Ursino et
al, (2017) <doi:10.1002/bimj.201600084>, enter pharmacokinetics (PK) in the dose
finding designs in different ways, including covariates models, dependent
variable or hierarchical models. This package provides functions to generate
data from several scenarios and functions to run simulations which their
objective is to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD).

`r pkg("microsamplingDesign")`:
Find optimal microsampling designs for non-compartmental
pharacokinetic analysis using a general simulation methodology. This
methodology consist of (1) specifying a pharmacokinetic model
including variability among animals; (2) generating possible
sampling times; (3) evaluating performance of each time point choice
on simulated data; (4) generating possible schemes given a time
point choice and additional constraints and finally (5) evaluating
scheme performance on simulated data. The default settings differ
from the article of Barnett and others, in the default
pharmacokinetic model used and the parameterization of variability
among animals.

`r pkg("PopED")`:  computes optimal experimental designs for both 
population and individual studies based on nonlinear mixed-effect models.

### Links
-   [PKBugs](https://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/software/bugs/the-bugs-project-pkbugs/)
-   [WinBUGS](http://winbugs-development.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/)
-   [NONMEM](http://www.iconplc.com/innovation/nonmem/)
-   [STAN](http://mc-stan.org/)
